The Mappings directory structure is:


mappings ---------------------------- |                          | src lab
--------------------          --------- | |          |         |        |
mastercode   |      includes      dats abund workcode


mappings:   Contains a mappings setup and the readme and other info docs as
they change.

src:    Contains the code area and the Makefile.

Makefile.   This new makefile now controls all the building of MAPPINGS, and
includes the fucntionality of the old builmap, preapre and cleanup scripts.  It
takes one argument to control the operation:

Type 'make help'    to see this menu Type 'make build'   to create executable
from scratch and clean

Type 'make prepare' to copy over '*.f' and '*.inc' files Type 'make compile' to
create executable Type 'make backup'  to backup '*.f' and '*.inc' files Type
'make clean'   to backup '*.f' and '*.inc', remove '*.o' Type 'make listing' to
create listing of code

The makefile has commented compile options for various machines, although you
will need to experiemtn on any given

machine.

All the useful parameters are near the top of the makefile.


mastercode: Contains a master copy of the code - only accessed by the Makefile.

workcode:   The Makefile copies the .f files here.  These can be edited etc by
the user.   The Makefile compiles these files to make the executable.

lab:    This is where the executable is made and run.  The runtime files such
as map.prefs are here and the essential dats directory with the runtime data
files.  This new area (named after the old VAX area) keeps the output files
away from the source code for the first time in a while.

map3        The executable.

map.prefs   Essential startup data - must be present.

dats:       Contains the atomic data for MAPPINGS III. Read at runtime in
mapinit.f.  Essential and must be present and complete.

abund:      A set of useful abundance settings that can be read interactivley
during a run.  Optional.


Compiling & running: --------------------

Untar the archive (already done or you wouldn't be reading this)

> cd mappings/src

> make build

[wait a while....]

> cd ../lab

> map3



Whats New: ----------

1.0.0g-q:

* Dust improved throughout code. Now the possibility of  different grain
distributions, compositions and grain charges. Photoelectric heating by dust
corrected and altered for new dust, also altered to increase calculation speed.
Discussed in Groves et al 2003a (forthcoming) )

* two new programs added: -radpress (in functions.f) to include the effects of
radiation pressure (see Dopita el al 2002, ApJ, 572, 753 for discussion) 
-dusttemp.f calculates individual grain temperatures and dust IR emission (see
Groves et al 2003b (forthcoming) for discussion of program) 
* New radiation vector added:

PHOTDAT.ir		1802 bins, PHOTDAT.std plus 75 bins placed logarithmically below,
to account for IR emission calculation.

* PAH grains altered to include nominal PAH emission, as well as photoelectric
effect and absorbtion.

* Several small errors fixed in code.




1.0.0d-g:

* Many improvements to prepare for accurate X-ray preditictions.  New continuum
calculations finalised.

* Hydrogenic spectra for heavy elements made accurate, assuming case A and
scaling the collisional rates from hydrogen - included recombination and
collisional excitation.

* Improved spectrum output.  New file specXXXX.ph4 or .sh4 contains a line by
line wavelength sorted spectrum list for easier machine reading (may be easier
for humans to read too!)  Includes a rough indication of reliability 1 - best,
2 - good, 3 - as good as can be managed *or*  may be affected by external
factors (ie Lyman Alpha)

* A wider range of radiation vectors can be used depending on the detail
required.

PHOTDAT.old      360 bins above 5 eV - the old MAPPINGS II vector for backward
compatibility and testing only.

PHOTDAT.std      1727 bins over all wavelengths, a good all round spectrum

PHOTDAT.short    939 bins above 5eV, same bins as std.  Quite accurate and
faster than std when optical/IR continuum output is not needed, or during early
iterations when speed is more useful.

PHOTDAT.max      3069 bins over all wavelengths, very slow, maximum coverage
PHOTDAT.hix      1489 bins above 5 eV - high res X-rays, same bins as max but
saves on time by not putting optical/IR in the radiation vector for ionisation
calculations. PHOTDAT.snx      2048 bins above 0.35 eV - highest res ionising
and X-rays, quite slow and less coverage than max.  Best for dust free high res
appilcations in the optical and X-rays.

These files can be copied in place of dats/PHOTDAT for a given run.


1.0.0c:

* fixed lingering errors in conintuum calculations and speeded them up
somewhat.

1.0.0b:

* All variables are declared! (this only took 20 years)  All files have
'implicit none' included automatically so all future variables will be declared
(or else!).

* The energy/wavelength/frequency scale has been revised to reflect more recent
data.  Lyman limit is  13.59844 eV, 1 eV is 1.60217733e-12 and the Lyman limit
is 911.7534400 Angstroms. (h = 6.6260755e-27).

* The spectral wavelength range in the radiation vectors now covers up to
1.23984424449e-3 eV to 1.23984424449e4 eV (1000 microns to 1 A) in 1642 bins.
'PHOTDAT.std' in mappings/exp/altdats - must be renamed PHOTDAT in lab/dats to
be used.  'PHOTDAT.std' is already installed as lab/dats/PHOTDAT to begin with.

* Other vector binnings can be substituted if all that IR is not necesary and a
short vector of about 900 bins in the UV/X-ray is available. 'PHOTDAT.short' in
mappings/exp/altdats - must be renamed PHOTDAT in lab/dats to be used.

* The old MAPPINGS II vector can be used at the risk of some small binning
errors - this is meant for testing only. 'PHOTDAT.old' in mappings/exp/altdats
- must be renamed PHOTDAT in lab/dats to be used.

* New wide spectral range contiuum calculations have been implemented. In
particular free-free emission is very accurate over the whole range. Hydrogenic
free-bound continuum now has 26 edges for all hydrogenic species.  Two photon
continuum for Hydrogenic and Helium like ions has a new improved probability
function and are scaled correctly for the first time in the diffuse field (The
printout was always right)

* All.sou files now output two columns (eV and Fnu), with the energy column
representing the lower energy edge of each bin.  New .nfn files are output with
nu and nuFnu columns.  Only .sou files can be used as sources.

* All .sou and .nfn file are in 3D 1/4pi sr units - always.  External source
files from say stellar atmospheres may need to be scaled appropriately.

* All .sou and .nfn files have and addition headerline as an ID for the binning
used: Old       = -1                : The MAPPINGS II binning Std       = -2 :
The new full range spectrum Short     = -3                : The MAPPINGS III UV
only spectrum = -4 : Mystery spectrum HIX       = -5 : High resolution above
5eV SNX       = -6                : Optical/UV/X super resolution MAX       =
-7                : Full coverage, max bins reserved  = -8...-1024 free      =
-1025... -maxint  :free for use by users

If you make your own photon binning please observe the above id restrictions.
The number must be -ve so old code will just ignore new files.  See photsou.f
for implementation details.

The file PHOTDAT (in dats) contains the ID and energy bins to be used in a
given run. const.inc implies a maximum value of 3072 bins.  The standard only
used 1727 of these.  Simply copy the appropriate one in the dats directory and
rename it 'PHOTDAT' if you wish to change the field.  The standard field is the
initial setting.

* The common block arrays now have parameter constants for size and the
const.inc file can be edited to resize almost all of MAPPINGS.


* The new .sou files are incompatible with MAPPINGS II/I.

* Source files now work correctly in plane parallel and spherical corrdinates.
The new code can output the final nebula+source or just nebula fields in nuFnu
or Fnu files.

* The .sou and .nfn files are quite accurate in plane parallel geometry and
accurate line/continuum ratios can be determined from them. However, spherical
models have small (~1%) errors due to dilution approximations and the
photnXXXX.ph4 files should be used for all accurate line ratio work.

* The new code is slower.

* The old dust code should only be used if the 'PHOTDAT.old' is in use until
the dust data is revised.
